Rework the template for Model Control Plane (#15)
zenml-io/template-e2e-batch: README.md

to top it all off, a simple but useful CLI. This is exactly
what the ZenML templates are all about.

This project template is a great starting point for anyone looking to deepen their knowledge of ZenML.
It consists of two pipelines with the following high-level setup:
<p align="center">
  <img height=300 src="template/.assets/00_pipelines_composition.png">
</p>

Both pipelines are inside a shared Model Control Plane model context - training pipeline creates and promotes new Model Control Plane version and inference pipeline is reading from inference Model Control Plane version. This makes those pipelines closely connected, while ensuring that only quality assured Model Control Plane versions are used to produce predictions delivered to stakeholders.
* [CT] Training
  * Load, split, and preprocess the training dataset
  * Search for an optimal model object architecture and tune its hyperparameters
  * Train the model object and evaluate its performance on the holdout set
  * Compare a recently trained model object with one promoted earlier

>   * If a recently trained model object performs better - stage it as a new inference model object in model registry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * If a recently trained model object performs better, then stage it as a new inference model object in the model registry
```

>   * On success of the current model object - stage newly created Model Control Plane version as the one used for inference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * On success of the current model object, then stage newly created Model Control Plane version as the one used for inference
```

* [CD] Batch Inference
  * Load the inference dataset and preprocess it reusing object fitted during training
  * Perform data drift analysis reusing training dataset of the inference Model Control Plane version as a reference
  * Run predictions using a model object from the inference Model Control Plane version

>   * Store predictions as an versioned artifact and link it to the inference Model Control Plane version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Store predictions as a versioned artifact and link it to the inference Model Control Plane version
```

to design flexible and reusable steps
* using [custom data types for your artifacts and writing materializers for them](https://docs.zenml.io/user-guide/advanced-guide/artifact-management/handle-custom-data-types)
* constructing and running a [ZenML pipeline](https://docs.zenml.io/user-guide/starter-guide/create-an-ml-pipeline)

> * TODO: add Model Control Plane docs

Reviewer: TODO marker

Author: Rephrased and added a reminder to docs ticket

We will be going section by section diving into implementation details and sharing tips and best practices along this journey.

### [Continuous Training] Training Pipeline

> Training pipeline is designed to create a new Model Control Plane version and promote it to inference stage upon successful quality assurance at the end of the pipeline. This ensures that we always infer only on quality assured Model Control Plane version and provides a seamless integration of required artifacts of this Model Control Plane version later on inference runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Training pipeline is designed to create a new Model Control Plane version and promote it to inference stage upon successfully passing the quality assurance at the end of the pipeline. This ensures that we always infer only on quality-assured Model Control Plane version and provides a seamless integration of required artifacts of this Model Control Plane version later on inference runs.
```

  <img height=500 src="assets/03_train.png">
</p>

> Having the best model architecture and its hyperparameters defined in the previous stage makes it possible to train a quality model object. Also, model training is the right place to bring an [Experiment Tracker](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/experiment-trackers) into the picture - we will log all metrics and model object itself into the [Experiment Tracker](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/experiment-trackers), so we can register our model object in a [Model Registry](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-registries) and pass it down to a [Model Deployer](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-deployers) easily and traceable. We will use information from Active Stack to make implementation agnostic of the underlying infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having the best model architecture and its hyperparameters defined in the previous section makes it possible to train a quality model object. Also, model training is the right place to bring an [Experiment Tracker](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/experiment-trackers) into the picture - we will log all metrics and model object itself into the [Experiment Tracker](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/experiment-trackers), so we can register our model object in a [Model Registry](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-registries) and pass it down to a [Model Deployer](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-deployers) easily and traceable. We will use information from the active stack to make the implementation agnostic of the underlying infrastructure.
```

(just switched out the word 'stage' as we use it in a different way elsewhere.

> To make the most out of the Model Control Plane we additionally annotate output model object as a Model Artifact, by doing so it will be properly categorized for future use and get additional model object specific features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the most of the Model Control Plane we additionally annotate the output model object as a Model Artifact, and by doing so it will be properly categorized for future use and get additional model object-specific features.
```

<details>
  <summary>Code snippet 💻</summary>

```python
from zenml.model import ModelArtifactConfig

experiment_tracker = Client().active_stack.experiment_tracker
@step(experiment_tracker=experiment_tracker.name)
def model_trainer(
    ...
) -> Annotated[ClassifierMixin, "model", ModelArtifactConfig()]:
  ...
```
</details>

> Even knowing that the hyperparameter tuning step happened we would like to ensure that our model object meets at least minimal quality standards - this quality gate is on the evaluation step. In case the model object is of low-quality metric-wise an Exception will be raised and the pipeline will stop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even knowing that the hyperparameter tuning step happened we would like to ensure that our model object meets at least minimal quality standardsy this quality gate is on the evaluation step. In case the model object is of low quality metric-wise an `Exception` will be raised and the pipeline will stop.
```

> Even knowing that the hyperparameter tuning step happened we would like to ensure that our model object meets at least minimal quality standardsy this quality gate is on the evaluation step. In case the model object is of low quality metric-wise an `Exception` will be raised and the pipeline will stop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even knowing that the hyperparameter tuning step happened we would like to ensure that our model object meets at least minimal quality standards; this quality gate is on the evaluation step. In case the model object is of low quality metric-wise an `Exception` will be raised and the pipeline will stop.
```

> To notify maintainers of our Model Control Plane model about failures or successful completion of a pipeline we use [Alerter](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/alerters) of the active stack. For failures it is convenient to use pipeline hook `on_failure` and for successes, a step notifying about it added as a last step of the pipeline comes in handy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To notify maintainers of our Model Control Plane model about failures or successful completion of a pipeline we use the active stack's [Alerter](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/alerters) component. For failures it is convenient to use pipeline hook `on_failure` and for successes, a step notifying about it added as a last step of the pipeline comes in handy.
```

  <img height=500 src="assets/04_promotion.png">
</p>

Once the model object is trained and evaluated on meeting basic quality standards, we would like to understand whether it is good enough to beat the existing model object used in inference. This is a very important step, as promoting a weak model object as inference might result in huge negative impact at the end of the day.

In this example, we are implementing metric compare promotion to decide on the spot and avoid more complex approaches like Champion/Challengers shadow deployments. In other projects, other promotion techniques and strategies can be used.

To achieve this we would retrieve the model registry version from [Model Registry](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-registries): latest (the one we just trained) and current (the one having a proper tag). Next, we need to deploy both model objects using [Model Deployer](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-deployers) and run predictions on the testing set for both of them. Next, we select which one of the model registry versions has a better metric value and associate it with the inference tag.

> As a last step we promote current Model Control Plane version to inference stage, if promotion decision was made.By doing so we ensure that the best Model Control Plane version would be used for inference later on and ensure seamless integration of relevant artifacts from training pipeline in batch inference pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a last step we promote the current Model Control Plane version to the inference stage, if a promotion decision was made. By doing so we ensure that the best Model Control Plane version would be used for inference later on and ensure seamless integration of relevant artifacts from training pipeline in the batch inference pipeline.
```

### [Continuous Deployment] Batch Inference

> Batch Inference pipeline is designed to run with inference Model Control Plane version context. This ensures that we always infer only on quality assured Model Control Plane version and provide seamless integration of required artifacts created during training of this Model Control Plane version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Batch Inference pipeline is designed to run with inference Model Control Plane version context. This ensures that we always infer only on quality assured Model Control Plane version and provide seamless integration of required artifacts created during training of this Model Control Plane version.
```

@pipeline(on_failure=notify_on_failure)
def e2e_example_training(...):
  ...
  promote_metric_compare_promoter_in_model_registry(...)
  notify_on_success(after=["promote_metric_compare_promoter_in_model_registry"])
```
</details>

### [Continuous Training] Training Pipeline: Model Control Plane version promotion

[📂 Code folder](template/steps/promotion/)
<p align="center">
  <img height=500 src="assets/04_promotion.png">
</p>

> Once the model object is trained and evaluated on meeting basic quality standards, we would like to understand whether it is good enough to beat the existing model object used in inference. This is a very important step, as promoting a weak model object as inference might result in huge negative impact at the end of the day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the model object is trained and evaluated on meeting basic quality standards, we would like to understand whether it is good enough to beat the existing model object used in inference. This is a very important step, as promoting a weak model object as inference might have a huge negative impact.
```

> In this example, we are implementing metric compare promotion to decide on the spot and avoid more complex approaches like Champion/Challengers shadow deployments. In other projects, other promotion techniques and strategies can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we are implementing promotion based on metric comparison to decide on the spot and avoid more complex approaches like Champion/Challengers shadow deployments. In other projects, other promotion techniques and strategies can be used.
```

To achieve this we would retrieve the model registry version from [Model Registry](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-registries): latest (the one we just trained) and current (the one having a proper tag). Next, we need to deploy both model objects using [Model Deployer](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-deployers) and run predictions on the testing set for both of them. Next, we select which one of the model registry versions has a better metric value and associate it with the inference tag.

> As a last step we promote the current Model Control Plane version to the inference stage, if a promotion decision was made. By doing so we ensure that the best Model Control Plane version would be used for inference later on and ensure seamless integration of relevant artifacts from training pipeline in the batch inference pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a last step we promote the current Model Control Plane version to the inference stage if a promotion decision was made. By doing so we ensure that the best Model Control Plane version would be used for inference later on and ensure seamless integration of relevant artifacts from training pipeline in the batch inference pipeline.
```

### [Continuous Deployment] Batch Inference

> The Batch Inference pipeline is designed to run with inference Model Control Plane version context. This ensures that we always infer only on quality assured Model Control Plane version and provide seamless integration of required artifacts created during training of this Model Control Plane version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Batch Inference pipeline is designed to run with inference Model Control Plane version context. This ensures that we always infer only on quality-assured Model Control Plane version and provide seamless integration of required artifacts created during training of this Model Control Plane version.
```

The process of loading data is similar to training, even the same step function is used, but with the `is_inference` flag.

> But inference flow has an important difference - there is no need to fit preprocessing `Pipeline`, rather we need to reuse one fitted during training on the train set, to ensure that the model object gets the expected input. To do so we will use [ExternalArtifact](https://docs.zenml.io/user-guide/advanced-guide/pipelining-features/configure-steps-pipelines#pass-any-kind-of-data-to-your-steps) with lookup by `model_artifact_name` only to get the preprocessing pipeline fitted during quality assured training run. This is possible, since we configured batch inference pipeline to run inside a Model Control Plane version context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But inference flow has an important difference - there is no need to fit preprocessing `Pipeline`, rather we need to reuse one fitted during training on the train set, to ensure that the model object gets the expected input. To do so we will use [ExternalArtifact](https://docs.zenml.io/user-guide/advanced-guide/pipelining-features/configure-steps-pipelines#pass-any-kind-of-data-to-your-steps) with lookup by `model_artifact_name` only to get the preprocessing pipeline fitted during the quality assurance training run. This is possible, since we configured batch inference pipeline to run inside a Model Control Plane version context.
```

On the drift reporting stage we will use [standard step](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/data-validators/evidently#the-evidently-data-validator) `evidently_report_step` to build Evidently report to assess certain data quality metrics. `evidently_report_step` has a number of options, but for this example, we will build only `DataQualityPreset` metrics preset to get a number of NA values in reference and current datasets.

> We pass `dataset_trn` from training pipeline as a `reference_dataset` here, to do so we will use [ExternalArtifact](https://docs.zenml.io/user-guide/advanced-guide/pipelining-features/configure-steps-pipelines#pass-any-kind-of-data-to-your-steps) with lookup by `model_artifact_name` only to get the training dataset used during quality assured training run. This is possible, since we configured batch inference pipeline to run inside a Model Control Plane version context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We pass `dataset_trn` from training pipeline as a `reference_dataset` here. To do so we will use [ExternalArtifact](https://docs.zenml.io/user-guide/advanced-guide/pipelining-features/configure-steps-pipelines#pass-any-kind-of-data-to-your-steps) with lookup by `model_artifact_name` only to get the training dataset used during quality assured training run. This is possible, since we configured batch inference pipeline to run inside a Model Control Plane version context.
```

> We pass `dataset_trn` from training pipeline as a `reference_dataset` here. To do so we will use [ExternalArtifact](https://docs.zenml.io/user-guide/advanced-guide/pipelining-features/configure-steps-pipelines#pass-any-kind-of-data-to-your-steps) with lookup by `model_artifact_name` only to get the training dataset used during quality assured training run. This is possible, since we configured batch inference pipeline to run inside a Model Control Plane version context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We pass `dataset_trn` from training pipeline as a `reference_dataset` here. To do so we will use [ExternalArtifact](https://docs.zenml.io/user-guide/advanced-guide/pipelining-features/configure-steps-pipelines#pass-any-kind-of-data-to-your-steps) with lookup by `model_artifact_name` only to get the training dataset used during quality-assured training run. This is possible, since we configured batch inference pipeline to run inside a Model Control Plane version context.
```

> After the report is built we execute another quality gate using the `drift_quality_gate` step, which assesses if a significant drift in NA count is observed. If so, execution is stopped with an exception.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the report is built we execute another quality gate using the `drift_quality_gate` step, which assesses if a significant drift in the NA count is observed. If so, execution is stopped with an exception.
```

As a last step concluding all work done so far, we will calculate predictions on the inference dataset and persist them in [Artifact Store](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/artifact-stores) for reuse.

As we performed promotion as part of the training pipeline it is very easy to fetch the needed model registry version from [Model Registry](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-registries) and deploy it for inference with [Model Deployer](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/model-deployers).

> Once the model registry version is deployed the only thing left over is to call `.predict()` on the deployment service object and put those predictions as an output of the predictions step, so it is automatically stored in [Artifact Store](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/artifact-stores) with zero effort. We additionally annotated `predictions` output with `ArtifactConfig(overwrite=False)` to ensure that this artifact will get linked to a Model Control Plane version in a versioned fashion - this is required to deliver all history to stakeholders since Batch Inference can be executed using same Model Control Plane version multiple times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the model registry version is deployed the only thing left over is to call `.predict()` on the deployment service object and put those predictions as an output of the predictions step, so it is automatically stored in the [Artifact Store](https://docs.zenml.io/stacks-and-components/component-guide/artifact-stores) with zero effort. We additionally annotated the `predictions` output with `ArtifactConfig(overwrite=False)` to ensure that this artifact will get linked to a Model Control Plane version in a versioned fashion. This is required to deliver a comprehensive history to stakeholders since Batch Inference can be executed using the same Model Control Plane version multiple times.
```
